Enter Machine Learning

To combat the problem of sparse weather data globally, 
we constructed an alternative model to the FWI, that can determine forest fire risk using less data 
than is required by the FWI. 

This model allows for the 
prediction of wild fire risk in remote or under-funded regions that may not have access to the 
expensive equipment and infrastructure required to use a system like the FWI.

Each of our models requires only 3 of the 4 weather conditions required by the FWI to make a similar prediction.

We used a simple feed forward fully connected deep neural network architecture and trained on
publically accessible data provided by the government of Canada.

Due to time constraints, we only used data from 71 weather stations in Ontario since 2000.
But a massively upscaled version of the model
would ideally use global weather data from all historical sources.

This data allowed us to create a labelled data set linking weather data to FWI values,
 which we directly computed using the FWI algorithm.

To generate models that can predict fire risk based on less data,
 we trained subsets of weather data against the FWI labels

For exmaple, we made one model that learned to predict the fire
 risk based off of only temperautre, humidity, and wind speed.

We created a model for each set of three weather features to allow us to predict fire risk even 
while missing data.

Comparing the predicted values of our model to the true FWI values, we find that the models
give reasonable predictions 

As a control, we also trained a model using all 4 weather features,
which predicts the FWI with very high accuracy.

To demonstrate the effectiveness of our machine learning models, we computed the time averaged FWI and compared
it to the time average of our predictions for the 71 ontario weather stations. This geospatial data
allows us to determine the error of our predictions as distributed across Ontario.
We find reasonable agreement, with all FWI values having less than 30% error.

Having validated our model locally in Ontario, we scale up to make global predictions based on satelite data.

NASA provides open access to temperature, humidity and windspeed data globally in real time.
We fed ths data to our model for temperature, humidity and windspeed  to construct a global prediction of fire risk.























